= GTK4 for Graphical User Interfaces
with the Nim Programming Language
(C) Dr. Stefan Salewski 2020
//v0.1, 15-AUG-2020
:doctype: book
:toc: left
:icons: font
//:experimental:
:imagesdir: http://ssalewski.de/gtkimages
//:imagesdir: /home/stefan/GtkProgrammingBook
:source-highlighter: pygments
:pygments-style: monokai
:stylesheet: nimbook.css

:cpp: C++
:ios: iOS
:macos: macOS
:win: Windows
:os: operating system
:proc: procedure
:gtk2: GTK{nbsp}2
:gtk3: GTK{nbsp}3
:gtk4: GTK{nbsp}4
:gtks: GTK's
:qtversion: 6
:ebassi: Emmanuele Bassi

////

asciidoctor -a stylesheet=asciidoctor.css gtkprogramming.adoc
 
we are using these custom roles for clean semantic markup:

[.new]##
[.term] terminal text
[.user] user input
[.ndef] new unknown entity
[.code] inline source code segment
[.imp] important

We use

<<section title>> for cross references
[[anchor]] for anchors
{nbsp}
+->+ disable replacements
GDK_DPI_SCALE=0.5 ./simplegtk3

////

This book gives an introduction into design and creation of graphical user interfaces
using the GTK widget tool kit and the Nim programming language. The book has its
focus on the Linux {os} (OS). While the Nim programming language does support all
mayor {os}s, GTK has it main emphasis on the Linux OS. {win} and {macos} are
supported by GTK, but without true native look and feel. Android and {ios} is not
supported by GTK, but there is some early experimental support for the [.new]#Librem#
mobile devices manufactured by the [.new]#Purism# company.  As GTK is compact and has
a modular design, it can be also used on devices with restricted resources like the
[.new]#Raspberry Pi# family.  While GTK is generally not used to create web
applications, it may be possible to run GTK applications locally in a web browser by
using the broadway GTK backend.

//[.normal]

== Graphical User Interfaces

GTK is the name of a toolkit for the design and the creation of graphical user
interfaces (GUI's) that allows users to interact with computer programs by use of
graphical elements like buttons, sliders, drop-down menus and input fields. These
elements are called widgets. Widgets can be grouped to build larger entities like
file or message dialogs. The top level widget is generally a rectangular container
called a window that contains all the other widgets. The initial release of GTK
appeared in the year 1998 named [.new]#GIMP tool kit# and was labeled GTK+. As the
Name GTK implies it was closely bound to the famous [.new]#GIMP# drawing program (GNU
image manipulation program) and was intended to replace the older Motif Unix GUI for
GIMP.

Graphical user interfaces were introduced already a few decades after the invention
of computers with the goal to simplify the interaction between humans and computers
by replacing the traditional terminal based textual user interfaces. GUI's allowed
even untrained people the intuitive interaction with computers without the need to
learn and remember many textual command. Closely coupled to graphical user interfaces
is the computer mouse, a small gadget that rests on the table and maps its movements
to a pointer on the computer screen allowing the interaction with the widgets. Today
the computer mouse is often supported or substituted by touch pads or touch displays.

After the release of GTK that toolkit was used by other software too, and in 2002
Version 2.0 of GTK appeared. {gtk2} had already a more modular design and was not
that tight couple to GIMP. In 2011 GTK{nbsp}3.0 appeared, which provided many new
features.  Most important was a new customizable design supported by [.new]#cascading
style sheets# (CSS), and the use of libraries like [.new]#cairo# for drawing the
graphical elements and of [.new]#pango# for font rendering. In late 2020 official
release of {gtk4} will appear, which has again an improved internal design, an
improved [.new]#application programming interface# (API) and which supports
[.new]#OpenGL# and [.new]#Vulkan# hardware drawing for the widgets to maximize
performance while keeping CPU load low.

.Smallprint
****

Unfortunately GTK is currently not in a very active state. There seems to be one or
two paid full-time developers which try to finish official release 4.0 and a few
volunteers which support the development. The number of active GTK programmers,
partly mirrored by the traffic of the GTK/Gnome forum, seems to be tiny, and most of
them use GTK still direct from C. Maybe because they have learned C decades ago and
never tried a modern language, maybe because GTK itself is written in C and its
native API documentation and examples are based on C language, or maybe because some
bindings to other languages are of bad quality or have not enough documentation and
examples.  Writing tiny GTK apps in plain C may be OK, but for larger programs plain
C becomes unmaintainable very fast.  At least for Python, JavaScript, Rust, {cpp} and
D there seems to exists a few users. But still the number of non trivial GTK apps
which appeared in the last decade is very small, and some existing apps did not
manage to move from {gtk2} to {gtk3} at all. But there is some hope that with the new
{gtk4} things will improve. Maybe with the official release of {gtk4} at the end of
2020 the quality of languages bindings will increase and maybe some new good books
and tutorials will appear making learning GTK programming easier and more fun.

****

While GTK can be used on {win} and {macos} computers, it is generally used on Linux,
and there often in conjunction with the [.new]#Gnome desktop environment#. The Gnome
foundation is the most important supporter of GTK development. GTK does not support
the Android or {ios} {os}s for mobile devices. The GTK related libraries uses the
LGPL software license, while the Nim compiler and most of Nim's external packages are
using the MIT software license. Both licenses allows the creation of proprietary
closed source software, as long as for the LGPL licensed libraries dynamic linking is
used.

Like most traditional GUI toolkits GTK uses a retained mode, where the graphical
scene is updated and redrawn only when necessary. In contrast to retained mode GUI's
in the last years immediate mode GUI's has become popular. These GUI's often have
their origin in simple GUI's for games and redraw the whole scene permanently,
generally synchronized with the screen refresh rate. The permanent redraws create
some CPU load of course, but for games that does generally not matter, as CPU and GPU
load are dominated by the game itself, and with OpenGL or Vulkan hardware support
drawing the GUI does not cause high CPU load. And finally the modern retained mode
GUI's like GTK are not really that static any more as they contain many animations.
So the distinction between retained and immediate mode GUIs is not that sharp.

The GTK toolkit has a modular design with these main components:

// description list
GTK:: Initialy GTK+, the GIMP tool kit. The GTK module builds the core of the GTK
widget tool kit and contains all the widgets.

GDK:: The gimp drawing kit. High level drawing related functions and data types.

GdkPixbuf:: Loading and manipulation of images.

GObject:: The GObject module provides an API for [.new]#object orientated programming# (OOP) in the
C programming language.

GLib:: GLib provides many supporting functions and advanced data types.

GIO:: Support for input and output operations including asynchronous operations.

GSK:: The GTK Scene Graph Kit is used to optimize the drawing and the widget refresh.

Graphene:: Math support like vectors and matrices.

ATK:: Accessibility support like screen readers or text magnifiers.

Other GTK related modules are [.new]#GtkSourceView# for advanced text layout support
as used for text editors like [.new]#gedit#, the [.new]#rsvg# module for support of
[.new]#scaleable vector graphics# (SVG) and the [.new]#VTE# module for the creation
of terminal windows. GtkSourceView and VTE are not yet available for GTK4.

Additional GTK uses these libraries for drawing and font rendering:

Cairo:: Scaleable vector drawing

Pango:: Font rendering

OpenGL, Vulkan:: GPU supported graphics

For Linux there is one more abstraction layer between the GTK toolkit and the
computer hardware, which is the [.new]#wayland# display server, a modern
implementation of the original [.new]#X Window System#.

All these components are written in the C programming language. C is a very old,
restricted and sometimes unsecure language, which can lead to very verbose code,
which is difficult to maintain. As GTK has an object-orientated design, but C
languages does not support OOP style, a whole object system called [.new]#gobject#
was written for GTK from scratch. And as C does not support high level data
structures like resizeable strings, hash maps, asynchronous in out operations and
much more important functionality which modern languages generally provide, this was
also written from scratch and is provided in supporting libraries like [.new]#glib#
and [.new]#gio#. As C does not support automatic memory management, in GTK it is
sometimes necessary to release memory manually, which may lead to the well known
problems like memory leaks or use after free issues.

It seems to be obvious that all these bloated legacy stuff is nearly unmaintainable
considering the tiny GTK and Gnome community. And today, when we have so many nice
modern languages available, nearly no one intends to write apps in C. When we take
into account the fact that GTK does not even supports the popular Android OS for
mobile devices, we may ask why we should care for GTK at all still.

Indeed a popular competitor of GTK is the Qt GUI toolkit with its KDE Linux desktop
environment. Qt appeared already in 1995 with a license model not well suited for
free open source software (FOSS), and is now available in version {qtversion} with
much less restricted licenses. Qt is written in C++ and is unfortunately even much
more bloated than GTK, and it uses a so called meta object compiler (MOC) as some
form of C++ preprocessor. Qt is really very large and includes a lot stuff which is
not really GUI related like network, web and database functionality or support for
many custom data types. All that is also available by modern C++ or specialized
libraries, so Qt can be regarded as a bloated application framework that is nearly a
whole {os}.  The advantage of Qt is that it is active developed and supports all
important {os}s including the mobile Android and {ios} systems with a native look and
feel.

As the proprietary {os}s like Windows, {macos}, Android and {ios} have all their own
native GUI, we do not need a separate toolkit when we plan to develop apps for only
one of these systems. And indeed users generally prefer apps that only use the native
GUI and avoid additional layers like GTK or Qt.

For many Windows or {macos} users GTK has the disadvantage that GTK draws all it
widgets itself, it does not use the native graphical elements of the proprietary
systems. GTK allows theming by use of cascading style sheets (CSS) so it can be tuned
to look not too strange on Windows and {macos}, but look and feel generally does not
really map to native apps. Qt draws its widgets itself on Linux, but can try to use
native elements on Windows or {macos} since version 4.0, which may provide a more
native look and feel.

One more important GUI toolkit is [.new]#wxWidgets#, which uses GTK on Linux and
native GUI elements on Windows and {macos}. Some people like wxWidgets as it is a
really cross platform GUI toolkit with native look and feel, but at least for Linux
it is just one more layer on top of GTK. And it does not support the mobile {os}s
Android and {ios}.

Beside the large toolkits Qt and GTK there exists many more smaller ones, as the
already mentioned wxWidgets, the FLTK toolkit written in {cpp}, or the old and plain
ones like LessTif or TK.

And finally we have always the option not to use a GUI toolkit at all but to create a
GUI based on HTML and JavaScript which can be used with web browsers.

The fact that GTK is written in C and so is very hard to maintain is at the same time
a large benefit: As C is a simple languages without advanced concepts like classes,
templates, inheritance or automatic memory managements it is generally very easy to
create bindings to C libraries from other programming languages. For GTK this fact is
even supported by the GTK [.new]#gobject-introspection# database which allows to
create bindings to all the GTK related libraries in a semi-automatic process.

So the majority of all the new modern computer programming languages have bindings to
the GTK toolkit. For Qt which is written in {cpp} it is much more difficult to create
bindings, as C++ concepts like C++ classes, templates and the MOC preprocessor makes
automatic bindings generation difficult.

So Qt is mostly used direct from {cpp}, or its well supported Python bindings are
used. Qt language bindings for many other programming languages exists, but it is
hard to keep them up to date. Sometimes Qt GUI's are also created with [.new]#QML#,
which allows to create user interfaces in a declarative manner. QML bindings are
available for various programming languages.

While GTK is still used often directly from C, it provides a larger set of official
supported languages bindings which include C++ (gtkmm), JavaScript, Python, Rust,
Perl and Vala. D and Go are also well supported, and for many other programming
languages at least bindings for a subset of GTK exists.

In this book we will use gobject-introspection based bindings to write GTK apps in
the Nim programming languages. Nim is a modern compiled statically typed language,
that can generate fast native executables from clean high level source code. As Nim
does not enforce OOP design with inheritance as languages like Java do, our Nim
examples follow the original C examples provided by GTK core developers. Some other
modern languages like Go or Rust use generally a similar approach and do not enforce
OOP and inheritance, while classical OOP languages like Java, Python or Ruby
generally enforce the use of classes and inheritance for GTK apps. C++ with its gtkmm
GTK bindings also push its users to OOP design.

We will use for this book semi-automatic generated {gtk4} and {gtk3} bindings which
are generated by the [.new]#gintro# package, where g stands for all the gtk related
libraries and intro for introspection as the bindings are generated by use of
gobject-introspection.

You should be aware that for the Nim programming language many more GUI toolkits are
available, some based also on GTK but with a different API design, and some based on
other libraries or written directly in Nim like the NimX module.

wNim:: Nim's Microsoft Windows GUI Framework

wxnim:: Nim wrapper for wxWidgets

fidget:: Figma based cross platform UI library

nigui:: Cross-platform desktop GUI toolkit

genui:: Cross-platform native UI toolkit

nimx:: Cross-platform GUI framework in pure Nim

webgui:: Web Technologies based Crossplatform GUI Framework

nimgui:: Cimgui bindings (dear imgui immediate mode lib)

nfltk:: A wrapper for the Fast Light Toolkit

iup:: Iup wrapper for Nim

nimqml:: Qt Qml bindings

ui:: Beginnings of what might become Nim's official UI library

uibuilder:: UI prototyping with Glade

sciter:: Nim bindings are work in progress

Some of these bindings may currently not compile with the latest Nim compiler or may
not support the new [.new]#ARC# memory management. But we recommend to investigate
them before you decide to use gintro, maybe one of them fits better you needs. wNim
should be a good choice when you intent to develop for windows only, nimx may be the
most fun as it is pure Nim, fidget looks really nice, nigui supports native look for
Windows, and finally nimgui is a bindings to the dear imgui immediate mode library.
Most of above bindings are hosted at github, you can use github, google or nimble
search to locate the packages.

== Introducing GTK

Note that we assume for this book that you are already familiar with computer
programming in general and with the Nim programming language. At least you should be
able to open a terminal window and to enter and execute some commands. Some basic
knowledge of the C language would also help, as we sometimes use C code as a starting
point for our Nim programs. 

GTK is an event driven toolkit. That is we create widgets like buttons or text entry
fields and connect them with one or multiple functions, which are then automatically
called when an input event like a button press or a text entry is discovered by GTK.

For creating a GUI we create and arrange all our widgets, and then connect widget
actions with our handler functions, called callbacks. The callback can perform
arbitrary tasks, this includes modifying the GUI by changing the appearance of
widgets, or by removing widgets or by adding new widgets.

Generally GTK does manage the actual layout of the widgets automatically for us, that
is widgets are automatically arranged and resized to create a clean nice look, and
when we resize the top level window or add or remove widgets, the layout adapts
itself automatically. This behavior is archived by the boxes in boxes concept
represented by GtkBox -- we create vertical or horizontal boxes, which we can fill
with widgets, and we can put these boxes again in other larger boxes in a recursive
manner. In this way we can specify the desired layout, but the concrete layout is
done automatically. For example buttons can resize automatically when the label text
or font size change. The horizontal or vertical boxes are supported by two
dimensional grids or by special containers like header bars. We can tune the layout
by specifying margins or distances between widgets, or we can modify the visual
appearance with CSS. But generally we do not create layouts where we specify exact
pixel positions for GUI elements. GTK also offers a fixed positioning and sizing
model, using the GtkFixed and the GtkLayout containers, but that is used only in rare
cases. Recently GTK also got a new constraint-based layout manager developed by
{ebassi}, which may allow to easily create even more flexible layouts.

We can create the desired widgets directly in our Nim source code, for example by a
call of [.code]#newButton("Sort List")#, or we can decide to create all the widgets
in a declarative fashion in external XML files. In the XML files we can arrange and
group all of our widgets in hierarchical layouts, and we can attach attributes like
size, color or textual labels to the widgets. We can create that XML file manually,
or we can decide to use the interactive [.new]#Glade# tool to create the XML file.

Using XML files and the Glade tool may appear simpler, more intuitive and more
flexible. When we create GTK programs directly in the C languages that may be true,
as C is a cryptic and verbose languages, which makes changes really difficult. For
high level languages like Nim or Python that is not really the case, so it is not
always clear if use of external XML files really have a benefit. XML based layouts
have the advantage that the GUI layout can be modified without recompiling the
program source code, so even users that do not have the source code of a program can
modify the GUI layout. But this is only an advantage when we do ship our software
without source code, and when we use the XML files in its original form as external
text files. But in most cases we integrate the XML files again into our main
executable to simplify the deployment. An additional disadvantage of the use of XML
files is that the Glade tool may not support all widget types and their properties
well, so that manual modifications of the XML files can be necessary.

So for the first part of this book we will create our GUI layout directly in the Nim
source code. Later we will introduce the use and layout of the XML files, and we will
describe how the GTK builder library component is used to import the XML files and to
access the widgets.

=== Installation of GTK

When you are interested in using GTK with Nim, them we should assume that you have
both already installed on your computer and played with them.

For Nim you will find detailed installation instructions on the Nim homepage:
https://nim-lang.org/install.html

On Linux computers GTK is generally installed by default, or at least available by
the package manager of your Linux distribution. If you should still have an old Linux
system which does not yet provide GTK4, you may install it beside your GTK3. For
example you may install the latest GTK4 from git which these commands entered in a
Linux terminal window:

----
# https://discourse.gnome.org/t/installing-gtk4-for-testing-on-opt-ii/3349/4
git clone https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk.git
cd gtk
meson --prefix /opt/gtk builddir
ninja -C builddir
ninja -C builddir install

# maybe also necessary:
export GI_TYPELIB_PATH=/opt/gtk/lib64/girepository-1.0
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/opt/gtk/lib64/
export PKG_CONFIG_PATH="/opt/gtk/lib64/pkgconfig/"

# you may test your installation with:
GSETTINGS_SCHEMA_DIR=/opt/gtk/share/glib-2.0/schemas /opt/gtk/bin/gtk4-demo
----

The installation of GTK for Microsoft Windows is described on the GTK home page:

https://www.gtk.org/docs/installations/windows/


and for {macos}:

https://www.gtk.org/docs/installations/macos/

If you have problems with the installation then you may ask for support at the GTK
internet forum:

https://discourse.gnome.org/

In the rest of this book we assume that you have also installed the Nim compiler and
a C compiler like gcc or clang.

When you have not yet installed the Nim GTK bindings then you may enter in a terminal
window:

----
nimble install gintro
----

The gintro package generates the bindings between the GTK libraries and the Nim
language locally on your computer by querying the gobject-introspection data base.
The generated modules depend on your {os} (Linux, Windows, Mac, 32 bit, 64 bit) and
on the available GTK version. If you update your GTK system it may be necessary to
update gintro by [.term]#nimble uninstall gintro; nimble install gintro#. Executing
that sequence is also recommended when a new gintro release is available. You can
also use [.term]#nimble install gintro@head# to get the latest gintro with latest,
less tested fixes.

.The GTK Nim Bindings
****

The Nim GTK relation has a long history. It started with low level bindings created
by the c2nim tool many years ago. In 2015 we then got low level, c2nim generated GTK3
bindings, which are still available in the oldgtk3 nimble package. But it was obvious
that low level GTK bindings are more than useless -- they transfer all the ugly
aspects of plain C into the Nim world, without transferring the few benefits of the
GTK C API like elaborated C GTK macros and well documented and tested API.  Nim
coding using low level GTK bindings is a pain compared to using C directly.  So it
was considered to use GTK's gobject-introspection API to generate high level Nim
bindings. A first experimental attempt was made already in 2015 by Mr.  Jason Mansour
(https://github.com/jdmansour/nim-smartgi), but the project was aborted soon. At the
same time Mr. Jonne Haß started to create gobject-introspection based bindings for
the new Crystal programming language, and the Rust project spent much work in
creating gobject-introspection based bindings to the Rust language.  In 2016
Dr.Salewski started a second try to write a gobject-introspection based bindings
generator in Nim and for Nim from scratch, with the initial goal to create some
working bindings similar to the oldgtk3 ones. In the following years work on the new
bindings continued, with the goal to provide really high level and high quality
bindings covering nearly all GTK related functions and data types. The nimble package
containing the bindings generator was called gintro, and in 2020 support for Nim's
new ARC memory management and for GTK4 was added.


From time to time there are request to provide pre-built bindings instead of
generating them locally for each nimble package install. One often raised argument is
quality insurance and audit support.  Well we would have to provide at least 6
different sets of the bindings -- for Linux, Windows, Mac, each in 32 and 64 bit
variant. And as {gtk4} is actively developed, we would have to update and test all of
them regularly. Still it would be possible that the newest modules would not work for
people with older GTK versions.  This does not mean that this solution is bad and
will not be supported in future, but the required work load to maintain it would be
really large.  Maybe a group of really active volunteers using various {os} could
manage it.  Another often requested solution is providing machine independent
bindings similar as the c2nim program tries to provide. But the fact is that
gobject-introspection is designed to provide machine dependent information only. So
the solution would be to generate machine dependent files for all supported targets
first, and then to compare the files for differences and try to unify them by
including machine sensitive when statements. Maybe that would be possible.
Unfortunately the initial gobject-introspection based files vary drastically with
each new GTK release, so we would need a permanent unifying and testing process.
Maybe we could fully automate that in some way? If not then again the work load for
the maintainers would be very high.

Maybe in future we will get also high level GTK bindings from other sources as an
alternative to the gintro based ones. Beside gobject-introspection based ones other C
header based approaches using libclang or using the tree-sitter library would be
possible. Such ideas have been discussed, but we should not have too high
expectations. The information which can be extracted from header files is generally
not sufficient for high level bindings, and using gobject-introspection is not really
easy and much work. But maybe someone will convert a well working
gobject-introspection based bindings generator to Nim, maybe one which is used by
languages like Go or Rust. As gintro generates high quality idiomatic bindings, all
bindings generated in alternative manner should be fully compatible, but maybe would
detect some hidden bugs.

Instead of using gobject-intrspection it was suggested also to directly inspect the
XML GIR files to gain information for the binding generation process. But that seems
to be a bad idea, even considering the fact that the gobject-introspection API is not
well explained and difficult.

Finally one may ask why the bindings are at all generated during the install process,
and not on the fly during the compilation of user programs. Theoretically on the fly
generation may be possible -- Nim macros may be able to query the
gobject-introspection database during the compile process for required data types and
functions.  The benefit would be that always the latest GIR files where used, the
user would never have to update the gintro nimble package. And for each compile of
the user program only the really needed data would be processed, while with the
pre-generated module files the whole GTK interface is compiled each time. But for
statically typed languages on the fly bindings generation seems to be strange and
probably is impossible. Compiling an average Nim GTK program takes about 3 seconds
with current Nim compiler, and will become faster when the experimental incremental
compilation will work reliable. So there is no real reason to complain.

****

=== Legacy Program Layout

{gtk3} introduces the GtkApplication framework, which is continued by {gtk4} and is
generally the recommended way to create GTK applications. Programs based on
GtkApplication seems to be a bit more complicated than the ones with legacy {gtk2}
startup code, but the GtkApplication style offers some benefits like management of
multiple program instances, parameter passing, and it enables new modern layouts with
header bars and hamburger menus. So we will use the GtkApplication style in the rest
of this book.

As you will still find many example programs that still uses the old {gtk2} program
startup code, we will present that program shape here first. The following C program
called simplegtk3.c uses the old {gtk2} style and can be compiled with this command:

----
gcc -o simplegtk3 simplegtk3.c `pkg-config --libs --cflags gtk+-3.0`
---- 

You can run it from a terminal window with this command:

----
./simplegtk3
----

The program will open a tiny window containing a single push button. Clicking that button will
write a message to the terminal window. You can terminate the program by clicking
with the mouse on the cross on the upper right corner of the program window.

// GDK_DPI_SCALE=0.5 ./simplegtk3
image::simplegtk3c.png[]

[[simplegtk3.c]]
[source,c]
.simplegtk3.c
----
// based on https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk/-/blob/master/tests/simple.c
// gcc -o simplegtk3 simplegtk3.c `pkg-config --libs --cflags gtk+-3.0`

#include <gtk/gtk.h>

static void
hello (void)
{
  g_print ("hello world\n");
}

int
main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  GtkWidget *window, *button;
  gtk_init(&argc, &argv);
  window = gtk_window_new(GTK_WINDOW_TOPLEVEL);
  gtk_window_set_title (GTK_WINDOW (window), "hello world");
  gtk_window_set_resizable (GTK_WINDOW (window), FALSE);
  g_signal_connect(window, "destroy", G_CALLBACK(gtk_main_quit), NULL);
  button = gtk_button_new ();
  gtk_button_set_label (GTK_BUTTON (button), "hello world");
  gtk_widget_set_margin_top (button, 10);
  gtk_widget_set_margin_bottom (button, 10);
  gtk_widget_set_margin_start (button, 10);
  gtk_widget_set_margin_end (button, 10);
  g_signal_connect (button, "clicked", G_CALLBACK (hello), NULL);
  gtk_container_add (GTK_CONTAINER (window), button);
  gtk_widget_show_all (window);
  gtk_main();
  return 0;
}
----

The source code has the typical structure of {gtk2} programs written in C language:
The first two lines are only comments, it follows an include directive to make the
gtk library available. The program consists of two functions, the C main() function
which is executed at program startup and a callback function called hello(). As usual
for C programs the main() function has two parameters, an array of optional command
line parameters and the number of parameters. These two parameters are passed to the
gtk_init() function which has to be called at the beginning of an old style gtk
program. In the main() function a new top level window instance is created by calling
gtk_window_new(). Then we set the window title and we set the resizable property to
false to give that window a fixed size. Then the function g_signal_connect() is
called to connect the "destroy" signal to the predefined callback function
gtk_main_quit() provided by gtk. The destroy signal is emitted for the window by GTK
when we click with the mouse on the window close symbol. In this case gtk_main_quit()
terminates the whole program. After this we create a button instance and set some
properties of the button like its label text and its margins to reserve some space
between the button and the border of the enclosing window. We connect the "clicked"
signal of the button instance to our hello() callback and add the button to the
window. We have to call gtk_widget_show_all() to make the window and its parents
visible. Finally we call gtk_main() to transfer control to the GTK main loop. That
loop now runs as some form of supervisor waiting for user actions and calling the
connected callback when appropriate. When the user clicks the close button of the
window the program terminates, the top level window is closed, the GTK main loops
stops and the last line of the C main() function returns the value 0 to the {os} to
indicate that no error has occurred.

A few remarks to above program: The GTK widgets are all pointers, and build a
hierarchy with parent/child inheritance in OOP fashion. The GTK widget is a sub class
of gobject, and other widgets like windows or buttons are again sub classes of
widget. In GTK C code the widget is generally used as the static base type. So when a
button widget is used, then a variable of type widget is declared and
gtk_button_new() returns not a button instance, but the plain widget type. This has
the consequence that whenever we use a button function on that instance, we have to
cast the widget to a button type as in [.code]#gtk_button_set_label (GTK_BUTTON
(button), "hello world)"#. That is a convention chosen by the initial GTK creators.
Note that in C casts like GTK_BUTTON() do type checks at runtime and give runtime
warnings when the types do not match. We may wonder if we have to free widgets when
we do not need them any longer. Indeed in C code that can be necessary in some cases.
GTK uses reference counting for its objects, that is that each object has a reference
counter. In C we can increase that counter to reference an object, that is to ensure
that it is kept alive and is not destroyed by GTK. When we do not need that object
any more we can decrease the reference counter. If the reference counter drops to
zero then GTK destroys the object, that is GTK frees its memory and closes related
resources. But often we do not have to really care for that. The reason for that is
that GTK uses a special variant of reference counting: When we create a widget with a
constructor like gtk_button_new() we get an instance which is market as "floating"
indicating that the instance is not already owned by someone. Generally we insert
each widget that we create into another widget, like a window or another container
widget, and that container widget then takes ownership of its child. When the program
terminates and the top level window is destroyed, then all its children are
automatically freed. So we have not to care about all that memory management in this
case. But there are exceptions to this process, so C programmers sometimes have to
carefully check when they have to ref() and unref() resources. Fortunately high level
languages like Nim or Python have a garbage collector which frees all objects when
appropriate, so we have not to care for this. Nim with gintro supports even the new
ARC memory management, which is deterministic and scope based: When a widget or
another object goes out of scope it is immediately freed and all related resources
are closed or released.

In the code above we use the function g_signal_connect() to connect widgets to a user
defined callback function. The signal type like "clicked" is not an enumeration type
as we may have expected but a string. The string data type shall enable extending of
the signal system, with enums that would not be possible. The g_signal_connect()
function allows to pass additional user data in form of a plain void pointer to the
callback functions. If there is no data parameter then NULL is passed. Fortunately in
Nim we can do the optional parameter passing in a type save way.

Another aspect that we should discuss is the margin size which we have specified for
our button. The margin is the void area around a widget. The literal value 10 used in
the set_margin() functions is a pixel size, as the GTK API is for historic reason
pixel based. Today where displays with very high DPI resolution are available, the
pixel is not always a good size unit. Distances like margins are generally related to
text size, so size units like em or ex for the size of letters as used in HTML and
CSS would be a more flexible size unit. To allow using of GTK on screens with very
high DPI value GTK3 and GTK4 use logical pixels, as opposed to physical ones. This
is, the user can configure the desktop environment to scale the pixel size, generally
by factor 1 for ordinary displays and by 2 for high DPI displays. Fractional scaling
factors are not yet supported, so this does not really allow a fine tuning of the
visual layout. Generally you should know that what really matters is not the DPI
value but viewing angle: When you have a large display with low DPI value and you
move it away from your eyes, it will appear like a smaller display with higher DPI
value.

Now let us investigate how above C program looks for GTK4:

[[simple.c]]
[source,c]
.simple.c
----
// https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk/-/blob/master/tests/simple.c
// gcc -Wall simple.c -o simple `pkg-config --cflags --libs gtk4`

#include <gtk/gtk.h>

static void
hello (void)
{
  g_print ("hello world\n");
}

static void
quit_cb (GtkWidget *widget,
         gpointer data)
{
  gboolean *done = data;
  *done = TRUE;
  g_main_context_wakeup (NULL);
}

int
main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  GtkWidget *window, *button;
  gboolean done = FALSE;
  gtk_init ();
  window = gtk_window_new ();
  gtk_window_set_title (GTK_WINDOW (window), "hello world");
  gtk_window_set_resizable (GTK_WINDOW (window), FALSE);
  g_signal_connect (window, "destroy", G_CALLBACK (quit_cb), &done);
  button = gtk_button_new ();
  gtk_button_set_label (GTK_BUTTON (button), "hello world");
  gtk_widget_set_margin_top (button, 10);
  gtk_widget_set_margin_bottom (button, 10);
  gtk_widget_set_margin_start (button, 10);
  gtk_widget_set_margin_end (button, 10);
  g_signal_connect (button, "clicked", G_CALLBACK (hello), NULL);
  gtk_window_set_child (GTK_WINDOW (window), button);
  gtk_widget_show (window);
  while (!done)
    g_main_context_iteration (NULL, TRUE);
  return 0;
}
----

The most important difference is the fact that gtk_main() is not called at the end of
the C main() function, but g_main_context_iteration() is called in a loop. The user
has to provide a way to terminate that loop to exit the program. Above program does
that by calling an additional function called quit_cb(), that is called when the top
level window is going to be destroyed (user clicks on the x symbol of the main
window) and that sets the done variable of the C main() function to the value true.
The function g_main_context_iteration() has two parameters, a GMainContext for which
we pass NULL to get the default one and a boolean value which determines if that
function may block or not. In the quit_cb() callback the function
g_main_context_wakeup() is called. That functions also has a parameter named context
of type GMainContext -- here NULL is again passed to use the default one. The
function g_main_context_wakeup() ensures that context is not blocking in the
g_main_context_iteration function.

Other less important differences are that gtk_init() and gtk_window_new() do not have
function parameters in GTK4, that gtk_window_set_child() is used instead of
gtk_container_add() to set the child widget of the top level window, and that
gtk_widget_show() is used instead of gtk_widget_show_all() to make the widgets
visible.

Now let us create a Nim version of the C code above: We may use the tool c2nim to
generate a nimified version of the C source code, and tune it a bit manually
resulting in this program:

[[simple.nim]]
[source,nim]
.simple.nim
----
##  https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk/-/blob/master/tests/simple.c
##  nim c simple.nim

import gintro/[gtk4, glib, gobject]

proc hello(b: Button) =
  echo "hello world"

proc quit_cb(window: Window; done: ref bool) =
  done[] = true
  wakeup(defaultMainContext())

proc main =
  var done = new bool
  gtk4.init()
  let window = newWindow()
  window.title = "hello world"
  window.resizable = false
  window.connect("destroy", quit_cb, done)
  let button = newButton()
  button.label = "hello world"
  button.marginTop = 10
  button.marginBottom = 10
  button.marginStart = 10
  button.marginEnd = 10
  button.connect("clicked", hello)
  window.setChild(button)
  window.show
  while not done[]:
    discard iteration(defaultMainContext(), mayBlock = true)

main()
----

The program structure follows closely the C program, there is no need to press the
code in classes. The first two lines are only comments. It follows an import
statement, we import the modules gtk4, glib and gobject unqualified into the global
name space, as common for Nim.  .footnote[You may wonder why the gtk module itself
has a numeric suffix, but other companion modules like glib and gobject do not. The
reason for this is that the main libraries gtk and gdk are available each in version
2, 3 and 4, and are not backward compatible. But for the old companion libs like
glib, gio, gobject and some more only one version is available and is used for gtk3
and gtk4 together. For the Nim bindings the gtk3 module was just called gtk for
historic reasons.] We have decided to call the function that contains the largest
code part main(), but that name can be freely selected in Nim. And we have to call
that function explicitly, there is no function that is called automatically in Nim.
Most statements in the Nim program directly corresponds to the statements in the C
code. We used method call syntax for most function calls as common in Nim, that is
instead of setChild(window, button) we write window.setChild(button). That may look
like OOP style, but it is at the end just a syntax variant. The gintro module uses
generally short unqualified function names, that is newWindow() instead of
gtk_window_new(). We could use a module qualifier like gtk4.newWindow(), but that is
only necessary if some of the imported modules export the same symbol (with same
signature) so that name conflicts occur. The Nim compiler reports the rare name
conflicts as errors, and we can add module prefixes in our Nim source code then. For
the init() function of the gtk4 module we have decided to use a module prefix from
the beginning -- for functions without parameters and with very short trivial names
the chance for name conflicts increase. And sometimes it is useful to indicate the
origin of a function by use of a module qualifier. For GTK objects and widgets, which
are pointer types in C, we have proxy ref objects in Nim. Constructors like
newWindow() or newButton() create a Nim proxy object on the heap and return its
reference, which is automatically de-allocated when it is not needed any longer by
our Nim code and by GTK itself. The proxy object contains a pointer to the GTK object
and some more fields for internal use. Opposite to GTK itself the gintro constructors
do not always return a plain widget, but they return the actual type like Button or
Window. For connecting GTK signals the type safe connect() macro call is used, which
accepts an optional typed argument. Currently that optional argument can be a plain
value like int or a ref object, but var parameters are currently not supported. So we
had to use a ref bool for the parameter of the quit_cb() callback function, as we
want to modify the boolean value in the quit_cb() callback and access the modified
value in the main() {proc}. We have to de-reference the done variable by the
dereference operator [] to access the content. The var parameter type should be
needed only in very rare cases as the optional parameter of the connect macro --
maybe gintro will support them later. The gintro connect macro is type safe, the data
types of all parameters have to match with the data types used in the connected
callback function. That is we have to pass a window or button parameter in the code
above. The data type of the optional parameter has to match also of course. For most
GTK signals the parameter list of the callbacks consists only of the object itself
and optional one more parameter, but there exists some signals which have more
parameters. One way to learn about these signals is to inspect the GTK C API. But we
have to remember that the GTK widget family build a hierarchy, so we may have to look
for the signals also in parent classes. For example when we inspect the GtkButton API
we will find only two signals, clicked and activate:
https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkButton.html#GtkButton.signals But as
GtkButton is a child of GtkWidget we could also use signals from
https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkWidget.html#GtkWidget.signals for our
button.

When we set properties or attributes we have generally various options, we can use
function or method call syntax and we can assign the value using the equal sign. For
the setter {proc} we can generally use the short name without the set name
component:

----
setTitle(window, "Hello")
title(window, "Hello")
window.setTitle("Hello")
window.title("Hello")
window.title = "Hello"
----

The Nim code above looks a bit bloated still due to the 4 set margin calls, each with
the same literal value 10. Well that program shape is a result of the initial C code,
and often the 4 values may be not really all identical. But when such code fragments
should occur often in our code we would define our own setMargin() {proc} that
would get one parameter and assign all four values for us, and we may define another
{proc} with four parameters to assign all 4 margins, we could call it with
button.setMartin(10) and button.setMargin(top = 5, bottom = 5, left = 20, right =
20). Note that Nim support default values for {proc} parameters. The gintro
package uses that fact for boolean properties which generally have the default value
true, so we can use a plain window.setResizable instead of window.setResizable(true).
To set that property to false we still have to use window.setResizable(false) or
window.resizable = false.

=== Application Style

Now let us investigate the new application program style that was introduced with
{gtk3} and is continued in {gtk4} nearly unchanged. We start with the {gtk4} variant
of the example that is presented at the GTK homepage, its C code has this shape:

[[hello-world.c]]
[source,c]
.hello-world.c
----
// https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk/-/blob/master/examples/hello-world.c
// gcc -Wall hello-world.c -o hello-world `pkg-config --cflags --libs gtk4`
#include <gtk/gtk.h>

static void
print_hello (GtkWidget *widget, gpointer data)
{
  g_print ("Hello World\n");
}

static void
activate (GtkApplication *app, gpointer user_data)
{
  GtkWidget *window;
  GtkWidget *button;
  GtkWidget *box;
  window = gtk_application_window_new (app);
  gtk_window_set_title (GTK_WINDOW (window), "Window");
  gtk_window_set_default_size (GTK_WINDOW (window), 20, 20);
  box = gtk_box_new (GTK_ORIENTATION_HORIZONTAL, 0);
  gtk_window_set_child (GTK_WINDOW (window), box);
  button = gtk_button_new_with_label ("Hello World");
  g_signal_connect (button, "clicked", G_CALLBACK (print_hello), NULL);
  g_signal_connect_swapped (button, "clicked", G_CALLBACK (gtk_window_destroy), window);
  gtk_box_append (GTK_BOX (box), button);
  gtk_widget_show (window);
}

int
main (int argc, char **argv)
{
  GtkApplication *app;
  int status;
  app = gtk_application_new ("org.gtk.example", G_APPLICATION_FLAGS_NONE);
  g_signal_connect (app, "activate", G_CALLBACK (activate), NULL);
  status = g_application_run (G_APPLICATION (app), argc, argv);
  g_object_unref (app);
  return status;
}
----

The main difference of the new application program style to the old {gtk2} style is,
that the C main() function now creates an application, connects the application to
various callbacks and then calls g_application_run() to execute it. The most
important callback is the activate callback that creates the application window with
all its widgets and connects callback functions to the widgets.

We can compile and run above C program when we enter these commands in the terminal
window:

----
gcc -Wall hello-world.c -o hello-world `pkg-config --cflags --libs gtk4`
./hello-world
----

image::hello_world.png[]

The GTK3 variant of above program is nearly identical, instead of
gtk_window_set_child(GTK_WINDOW(window), box) we would use the old
gtk_container_add(GTK_CONTAINER(window), box) to set the box as content for the
window, and to set the button as content of the box we would replace
gtk_box_append(GTK_BOX(box), button) by gtk_container_add(GTK_CONTAINER(box),
button). Another small difference is that GTK3 uses gtk_widget_destroy() instead of
gtk_window_destroy() and gtk_widget_show_all() instead of gtk_widget_show().

After applying that modifications you could compile the program for GTK3 with

----
gcc -Wall hello-world-gtk3.c -o hello-world-gtk3 `pkg-config --cflags --libs gtk+-3.0`
----

Note that we do not have to call gtk_init() when we use the application style.

In the C main() function we create our application by calling the function
gtk_application_new(). We pass a string which is used as an application id and some
flag parameter. After we have connected the application variable to our activate
callback function we run the application by calling g_application_run() of the gio
library. The application then runs until the application window is closed or until we
call gtk_window_destroy() on it. We can pass the command line arguments as parameters
to g_application_run(). The function returns an integer value as status result, which
is used as the return value of the main() function and passed to the {os} as the
result of the program execution. In the C code g_object_unref(app) is called before
the status value is returned to the OS and the program is terminated. Earlier we said
that even in C code we generally do not have to free objects or resources, because
most objects like widgets are initially unowned after creation, and when we add them
to containers the container takes ownership. For top level windows or the GTK
application that is not the case, so their constructors return a none floating object
with reference count set to one, and we have to destroy() or unref() them.

In the activate() callback we call gtk_application_window_new(app) to create a top
level application window, which is a subclass of a GTK window. In the activate()
callback we create a box as a container for our button widget. Containers like boxes
are used to arrange and group widgets. The GTK box constructor gtk_box_new() has two
parameters, an orientation and a spacing value. The orientation determines if the
contained widgets should be arranged vertically or horizontally. The spacing is an
integer value which determines the distance between the contained widgets, the value
is given in logical pixels. The box widget is then set as a child of the application
window by calling the function gtk_window_set_child(). After that we create a button
widget with a "Hello World" label text and connect that button to a callback function
called print_hello() which shall print a message to the terminal window when we click
with the mouse on that button. This program connects another callback function to our
button in a very special fashion: We want that our application window is closed and
the program terminates when we click on the button. For that we want to directly call
the gtk_window_destroy() function on our application window as a callback function.
The problem is, that when we connect a callback function to a button, then GTK would
pass the button instance to the callback as first parameter. But we intent to call
gtk_window_destroy() as callback with our application window as parameter. For this
rarely used special case GTK offers a variant of g_signal_connect() which is called
g_signal_connect_swapped() and which passes the optional user_data parameter to the
callback. In this way we can pass the application window as user_data parameter
directly to the gtk_window_destroy() function. In Nim this form of swapped parameter
passing is currently not supported, so we have to define our own function, which gets
the window as optional parameter and then calls destroy() on it. After we have
connected all the callback functions to our button we call gtk_box_append() to insert
the button widget into the box. Finally we call gtk_widget_show() on our application
window to make it and all of its children visible and we are done.

We have created our application window, a box widget and a button widget. We inserted
the box as child into the window, and we inserted the button widget into the box.
Note that the order in which we build that hierarchy is not important, we can first
insert the button into the box, or first insert the box into the window. Also note
that we can connect multiple callback functions to the same widget. In this case the
order is important, as the callback functions are called in the order as they were
connected. For our button, if we had connected the print_hello() callback function
last, that one would never get called, as the window would be destroyed before. Also
note that we can connect different widgets to the same callback function, i.e. we
could create multiple button widgets and connect them all to our print_hello()
callback function.

Now let use see how the above program looks in the Nim programming language by using
the gintro bindings. We applied the conversion tool c2nim on above C code and
slightly edited the result manually:

----
c2nim -o hello_world.nim hello-world.c
----

[[hello_world.nim]]
[source,nim]
.hello_world.nim
----
##  https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk/-/blob/master/examples/hello-world.c
##  nim c helloWorld.nim

import gintro/[gtk4, gobject, gio]

proc destroyWindow(b: Button; w: gtk4.ApplicationWindow) =
  gtk4.destroy(w)

proc printHello(widget: Button) =
  echo("Hello World")

proc activate(app: gtk4.Application) =
  let window = newApplicationWindow(app)
  window.title = "Window"
  window.defaultSize = (20, 20)
  let box = newBox(Orientation.horizontal, 0)
  window.setChild( box)
  let button = newButton("Hello World")
  button.connect("clicked", printHello)
  button.connect("clicked", destroyWindow, window)
  box.append(button)
  window.show

proc main =
  let app = newApplication("org.gtk.example", {})
  app.connect("activate", activate)
  let status = app.run
  quit(status)

main()
----

The Nim source code fully matches the C code. We use in most cases method call
syntax, and for window title and default size we use an assignment instead of a
{proc} call to set the properties. For the newApplication() call we explicitly
specify the empty set for the flag parameter, but we could have leave that out as it
is the default. In the C code gtk_application_new() passes plain integer flag values
which can be combined by bit wise or operations, and G_APPLICATION_FLAGS_NONE is
passed when no bit flag should be set. In Nim we use a bitset with a {} default for
the empty set. Finally we used the quit {proc} of system module to return the
status result to the OS. The only small difference of the Nim code to the C code is
that we do not use connectSwapped() but call an intermediate destroyWindow()
{proc} that obtains the application window as an additional parameter and calls
destroy() on it to close the top level window and to terminate the program. Providing
a type safe connectSwapped() {proc} for the Nim bindings seems to be hard, and we
would need it only in rare cases in real world code. Note that for the connect()
macro the type of the optional parameter has to match exactly the data type used in
the callback signature, that is while the body of the destroyWindow() {proc} would
work with a plain GTK window, which is a parent type of GTK application window, we
have to use still GTK application window in the {proc} signature, otherwise the
compiler would complain about incompatible types. That is a limitation of current
gintro bindings and results from the fact that the connect macro simple enforce type
matching, it does not actually invest the actual types of the provided callback
function and checks for type compatibility. If we have to use a plain GTK window type
for the second parameter of the destroyWindow() callback for some reason, then we can
make it work again with a type conversion like button.connect("clicked",
destroyWindow, gtk4.Window(window)).

We can compile and run our Nim program with following commands from a terminal
window:

----
nim c hello_world.nim
./hello_world
----

The above compiler invocation builds the executable in the default debug mode with a
lot of runtime checks enabled and without enabled optimizations for the C compiler
back end, so the executable size is large and the program would run not very fast.
Generally we compile our Nim programs with the option -d:release to restrict checks
to most important ones and to enable back end optimizations after we have tested our
program well in debug mode. That results in a smaller and faster executable. We can
further reduce the executable size by compiling our Nim program with the new Nim ARC
memory management and by enabling link time optimization for the C compiler back end:

----
nim c -d:release --gc:arc -d:useMalloc --passC:-flto hello_world.nim
---- 

Here we additional use -d:useMalloc to use plain malloc() instead of Nim's own memory
allocation. That commands gives us an executable size of about 40 kByte with gcc 10
back end, which is still larger than the C executable, but not that much. We could
disable all checks by specifying -d:danger instead of -d:release to further decrease
the executable size. Note that with above options our program is compiled for optimal
performance. If executable size is more important than performance then we could try
other compiler options like --opt:size, but for GUI desktops applications that makes
not much sense.

=== Nim API Docs

Unfortunately it is nearly impossible to provide a full set of commented API docs for
the gintro Nim GTK bindings. The GTK related modules consists of more than 10000
functions and about 2000 data types, constants and enums. It is planed to list them
all on some HTML pages, but that would provide only the symbol names and the
signature for {proc}. Copying the C comments verbatim would not make much sense,
and rewriting all comments for Nim would be a gigantic effort. Generally the best
solution for Nim is to follow the C API docs, which are generated by GTK directly
from the GTK C source code. The C API docs are in most cases of good quality and not
outdated, and the differences to the Nim API are generally obvious. For example if
you are interested in using GTK buttons, you can enter "GtkButton", "GTKButton gtk4"
or "GTKButton API" into the search field of an internet search engine and you should
get the matching GTK API page like
https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkButton.html. You may also consider
installing the GTK devhelp tool which provides the GTK C API without generating
Internet traffic.

For stubborn cases it may be useful to use the Linux grep tool from the terminal
window. Let us assume that you want to create a new button widget with a label and
you know that for C
https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkButton.html#gtk-button-new-with-label is
used for that. So maybe you tried from Nim [.code]#let button =
newButtonWithLabel("Run program")# but the Nim compiler tells you that this function
is not available. Well, the problem is obvious -- Nim supports function overloading,
so we have newButton(): Button and newButton(label: string): Button. But sometimes we
are just too tired. We know the name of the C function, so let us use that as a
starting point:

----
grep -C3 gtk_button_new_with_l ~/.nimble/pkgs/gintro-#head/gintro/*
...
proc gtk_button_new_with_label(label: cstring): ptr Button00 {.importc, libprag.}

proc newButton*(label: cstring): Button =
  let gobj = gtk_button_new_with_label(label)
  let qdata = g_object_get_qdata(gobj, Quark)
...
----

The gintro generated modules are generally located in
~/.nimble/pkgs/gintro-#head/gintro/ and contain clean and ordered code. Data types
and methods working on these types are grouped together. Let us assume that you want
to create a new GTK application but you are not sure which flags are available. Two
grep calls should give us all what we need:

----
grep -C3 gtk_application_new ~/.nimble/pkgs/gintro-#head/gintro/gtk4.nim
...
proc gtk_application_new(applicationId: cstring; flags: gio.ApplicationFlags): ptr Application00 {.
    importc, libprag.}

proc newApplication*(applicationId: cstring = ""; flags: gio.ApplicationFlags = {}): Application =
  let gobj = gtk_application_new(safeStringToCString(applicationId), flags)
  let qdata = g_object_get_qdata(gobj, Quark)
  if qdata != nil:
...
grep -B12 "ApplicationFlags\*" ~/.nimble/pkgs/gintro-#head/gintro/gio.nim 
type
  ApplicationFlag* {.size: sizeof(cint), pure.} = enum
    isService = 0
    isLauncher = 1
    handlesOpen = 2
    handlesCommandLine = 3
    sendEnvironment = 4
    nonUnique = 5
    canOverrideAppId = 6
    allowReplacement = 7
    replace = 8

  ApplicationFlags* {.size: sizeof(cint).} = set[ApplicationFlag]
----

For the second grep call we took advantage of the fact that the flags are exported,
so an export marker must follow the name. We had to put quotes around the search
string and to escape the asterisk.

=== GtkApplication and the Application Program Style

For {gtk3} and {gtk4} programs we generally use the application program style. In
this style we use a small arbitrary named main {proc} which creates our application by
calling newApplication(), then connects the application to a set of callback
{proc} with application specific signals and finally calls run() to run the GTK
main loop. All further program execution is now guided by GTK signals which causes
execution of our callback functions. The GtkApplication class is a subclass of
GApplication of module gio and supports signals like "startup", "activate", "open",
"shutdown" and some more.

Understanding the GtkApplication class is maybe the most demanding task for new GTK
programmers. Indeed it is not easy to understand the whole GtkApplication API, the
API docs are extensive and information is distributed over many places:

- https://developer.gnome.org/GtkApplication/
- https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkApplication.html
- https://developer.gnome.org/gio/stable/GApplication.html
- https://wiki.gnome.org/HowDoI/GtkApplication/CommandLine

Some beginner fear the application style and fall back to the old {gtk2} shape of
programming with its gtk.init() and gtk.main() calls. But the application style
offers a lot of benefits, that includes the new look with hamburger menus and the GTK
menubar, the GActions which decouples user actions from concrete input sources like
keyboard or mouse, and the automatic handling of program parameters and arguments and
handling of single or multiple windows or program instances.

For the beginning you can ignore most of the signals of the GTKApplication class and
connect your activate() {proc} only to the activate signal of the GtkApliclation class
as we did in our previous examples. Later you can add more signals and distribute
your whole startup code on multiple callback {proc}.

The most important GtkApplication signals are:

startup:: set up and initialize the application

activate:: program launch without file arguments, so open a default initial window

open:: launch with file arguments, display file content

shutdown:: do cleanup work, closing files or saving documents

When our application program starts, then the startup signal is emitted. We can
connect a startup callback {proc} to this signal that can perform some
initialization tasks that are not directly related to showing a new window. When our
program is invoked without file parameters then the activate signal is emitted next,
and our activate callback {proc} may open an empty window for the user. For the
case that the user passes some file parameters, the open signal is emitted instead of
the activate signal, and we have to open the specified files. Generally GTK
applications uses only a single program instance. If the user attempts to start a
second instance of a single-instance application then GtkApplication will send
signals to the already running first instance and we will receive additional activate
or open signals. In this case, the second instance will exit immediately, without
calling startup or shutdown. Our application programs generally terminates when we
close all open windows, but we can use the function g_application_hold() to prevent
terminating of our program. When our program finally terminates, we get the shutdown
signal, and our connected shutdown callback function can do some cleanup work or
maybe save all open files.

==== Primary and Remote Instances

One important decision we have to make when we write a program is how the program
should behave when we start it with and without arguments and when we start it
multiple times. The most basic solution would be to open a separate window for each
passed file argument, and to open more distinct windows when the program is started
multiple times. But that is not always what the user may expect: For a text editor or
image processing program the user may desire only one large window which is divided
into multiple areas for each passed file, or maybe some sort of stacked display. And
when a new program instance is launched, then the user may expect that the provided
file arguments are passed to the already running program instance. The GtkApplication
class can handle all this for us.

When we start our application then the first program instance is called the primary
instance. When we launch the program again, than that program instance is called a
remote instance. GTK uses the term local instance to refer to the current process,
which can be the primary instance or a remote one.

Signals are always emitted in the primary instance only. For remote instances
messages are send to the primary instance and signals are then emitted in the primary
instance.

==== Dealing with the Command Line

Normally, GtkApplication programs will assume that arguments passed on the command
line are files to be opened. In the case that files were given, our GtkApplication
program will receive these files in the form of GFile objects from the open signal.
If no arguments are passed, then the activate signal is emitted and the activate
callback {proc} may open its main window with an empty document.

The GtkApplication class supports also more advanced command line handling like the
processing of --help, --version and other program options. We will not discuss these
advanced options here, you may consult the API documentation for details:

- https://developer.gnome.org/GtkApplication/


==== Minimal Application Example

The following code example is the skeleton of a text editor program. We use the
signals startup, activate, open and shutdown. We also define callback {proc} for
some of the other signals available for the GtkApplication class to show their shape,
but they are not really active. Our program shall open an empty text window when
launched with no argument, and open a text file when a file argument is available.
When we call the program again with a file argument, then the existing text window is
reused for the new text file. As {gtk4} may not yet support the GtkSourceView widget,
we have used a plain GtkTextView for displaying the text. That widget is embedded in
a GtkScrolledWindow to provide scrollbars and scrolling functionality. With some
minimal changes you can use the code below for {gtk3} also: Replace setChild() with
add() calls, and show() with showAll(). For {gtk3} you can also replace the TextView
widget type with SourceView and then use the advanced functionality of gtksource
module to support stuff like syntax highlighting for program files.

As before our main() {proc} creates the application, connects the callback {proc}s to
signals and runs the application program. As we want to support the open signal, we
have to pass the command line parameters to the run() {proc}. As Nim does not give us
direct access to the command line argument string array, we have to construct it by
querying paramStr() for each argument. Note that we pass the flag
ApplicationFlag.handlesOpen to the newApplication() call to tell GTK that it should
not ignore file arguments. To keep the example short we made the activate {proc} dumb.
It creates a textview, a scrolled widget and the main window and inserts the widgets
into each other. A smarter activate() {proc} should try to detect an already existing
window of an already running primary program instance as it does the open() callback.
The open() callback {proc} uses app.getActiveWindow() to check if a primary instance of
our program is already running and reuses that window if possible. Otherwise it
creates new widgets in the same way as the activate() {proc} does. Then it calls
loadContents() to load the textual content from the provided GFile into a string, and
sets that text as buffer content of the textview widget.

Note that this is only a minimal skeleton. For a real text editor program we would
have to do much more checks, and we may want to handle multiple file arguments. We
will learn in later sections of this book how we can do that and which widgets
support the display of multiple texts.

[[textview.nim]]
[source,nim]
.textview.nim
----
# nim c textview.nim
# ./textview textview.nim
# minimal GtkApplication example
import gintro/[gtk4, gobject, glib, gio] # , gtksource] # gtksource is not yet available for GTK4

from OS import paramCount, paramStr

proc shutdown(app: Application) =
  echo "shutdown"

proc startup(app: Application) =
  echo "startup"

proc handleLocalOptions(app: Application; vd: VariantDict): int =
  echo "handle-local-options"

proc nameLost(app: Application): bool =
  echo "name-lost"

proc open(app: Application; files: seq[GFile]; hint: string) =
  var
    contents: string
    etagOut: string
    length: uint64
    buffer: TextBuffer
    window: gtk4.Window
    view: gtk4.TextView
  echo "open"
  for f in files:
    echo f.uri
  window = app.getActiveWindow
  if window != nil: # instead of opening a new window reuse existing one
    let h = ScrolledWindow(window.getChild)
    view = TextView(h.getChild)
  else:
    window = newApplicationWindow(app)
    window.title = "Text View"
    window.defaultSize = (800, 600)
    let scrolledWindow = newScrolledWindow()
    view = newTextView() # gtksource.newView()
    window.setChild(scrolledWindow) # add() for GTK3
    scrolledWindow.setChild(view) # add() for GTK3
  if files.len > 0:
    if loadContents(files[0], cancellable = nil, contents, length, etagOut):
      assert length.int == contents.len
      echo "hint: ", hint
      echo "etag: ", etagOut
      buffer = view.getBuffer
      buffer.setText(contents, contents.len)

  show(window) # showAll() for GTK3

proc commandLine(app: Application; cl: ApplicationCommandLine): int =
  echo "command-line"

proc activate(app: Application) =
  echo "activate"
  let window = newApplicationWindow(app)
  window.title = "Empty Text View"
  window.defaultSize = (800, 600)
  let scrolledWindow = newScrolledWindow()
  let view = newTextView() # gtksource.newView()
  window.setChild(scrolledWindow) # add() for GTK3
  scrolledWindow.setChild(view)
  show(window) # showAll() for GTK3

proc main =
  let app = newApplication("org.gtk.example", {ApplicationFlag.handlesOpen})#, handlesCommandLine})
  app.connect("startup", startup)
  app.connect("activate", activate)
  app.connect("command-line", commandLine)
  # app.connect("handle_local_options", handleLocalOptions)
  app.connect("open", open)
  app.connect("name-lost", nameLost)
  app.connect("shutdown", shutdown)
  let argLen = paramCount() + 1
  var argStr = newSeq[string](argLen)
  for i in 0 ..< argLen:
    argStr[i] = paramStr(i)
  discard run(app, argLen, argStr) # we have to pass an argString to support open signal handling files

main()
----

You can launch that program with or without a file argument, and launch it again with
a different file argument to replace the text shown in the textview widget.

----
nim c textview.nim
./textview &
./textview textview.nim
./textview anothertext.txt
----

We do not provide a picture for this program as it is not very interesting, it is
only a window with some textual content and some optional scrollbars at the right and
at the bottom of the window.


== Basic Widgets

In this chapter we will present some simple widgets that are useful and easy to
understand and to use. We have already used the toplevel widgets GtkWindow and
GtkApplicationWindow that build generally the outer rectangular container for our
whole graphical user interface. Windows normally have a title and decorations that
are under the control of the windowing system and allow the user to manipulate the
window (resize it, move it, close it,...). In {gtk3} and {gtk4} windows can have
only one single child, but this child can be a container widget which can hold many
widgets including more container widgets. So all the widgets are arranged in a
hierarchical fashion starting at the toplevel window widget.

=== GtkBox

Let us assume that we want to create some sort of buying app, that in its simplest
form may contain a text entry field where we can type in what we want to buy, and a
button to order that article. And we may want to have a textual label beside our text
entry field. So a sketch of our widget arrangement may look like this:

----

 label entry
   
   button

----

The label and the text entry should be arranged horizontally beside each other, and
centered below these two widgets there should be the buy button. GTK offers various
container widgets to create such a layout. We will start with the GtkBox container
which can arrange widgets horizontally beside each other, or vertically below each
other. For the label and the entry we create a horizontal box and insert these
widgets in that box. Then we create another vertically box in which we first insert
the first box, and then the button. And we are done.

----
  -----------------
 |                 |
 |  -------------  |
 | | label entry | |
 |  -------------  |
 |                 |
 |      button     |
  ----------------- 
---- 

image::basicWidgets1.png[]

[[basicWidgets.c]]
[source,nim]
.basicWidgets.nim
----
##  nim c --gc:arc basicWidgets1.nim

import gintro/[gtk4, gobject, gio]
import std/with

proc buttonCB(button: Button; entry: Entry) =
  let input = entry.text
  if input.len == 0:
    echo "Ordered a big bag of nothing!"
  else:
    echo "Ordered some ", input
    entry.setText("") # clear entry for new input
    discard entry.grabFocus # let keyboard input go again to this entry widget

proc activate(app: gtk4.Application) =
  let window = newApplicationWindow(app)
  let vbox = newBox(Orientation.vertical, 25) # outer box
  let hbox = newBox(Orientation.horizontal, 25) # inner box above button
  let label = newLabel("Food:")
  let entry = newEntry()
  entry.widthChars = 32 # widthChars function is from GtkEditable interface
  let button = newButton("Buy it now!")
  hbox.append(label)
  hbox.append(entry)
  vbox.append(hbox)
  vbox.append(button)
  button.connect("clicked", buttonCB, entry)
  with vbox:
    setMarginStart(25)
    setMarginEnd(25)
    marginTop = 10 # with a recent Nim compiler assignment inside with block works also
    marginBottom = 10
  with window:
    setChild(vbox)
    title = "Mississippi App"
    defaultSize = (400, 100)
    # show # works
  window.show # but this is more clear

proc main =
  let app = newApplication("org.gtk.example")
  app.connect("activate", activate)
  let status = app.run
  quit(status)

main()

----

The basic shape of above program is again similar to our first <<hello_world.nim>>
example: We have a main() {proc} that creates our application, connects it to the
activate callback {proc} and finally runs the app. The activate callback creates all of
our widgets and inserts them in a hierarchical way into the container widgets. The
button widget is connected to a callback {proc} that gets the entry widget as an
additional parameter, so that this {proc} can access our textual input by calling
getText(entry), which is equivalent to entry.text with method call syntax and without
the optional get prefix for the {proc} name. In the code above we use the new "with"
macro introduced in Nim version 1.2 which saves us from typing the widget names many
times. Unfortunately the assignment operator does not work in combination with the
"with" macro, so we have to use plain {proc} calls.

The box containers are created with a call of newBox() which needs an Orientation
enum parameter and an integer parameter specifying the spacing between the widgets in
the container in logical pixels. We insert our child widgets into the GtkBox
container using the append() {proc}. We could have also used prepend(). To learn more
about the GtkBox class you may visit

+ https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkBox.html

or invoke the [.term]#devhelp# tool.

The GtkLabel is a plain mostly passive widget which is used to display some textual
descriptions. It offers many functions to modify its appearance or to change the
textual content, for more info you may consult

+ https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkLabel.html

The GtkEntry widget is used for entering single lines of text. GtkEntry offers a
large set of functions and properties to modify its appearance. We can set the
maximum number of characters, make the text invisible for password queries or set the
alignment of the text when the text is smaller than the widget size. The widgets
allows simple editing with keys like left, right, backspace, you can click on
individual characters with the mouse to modify the insert position, or you can use
the default popup menu when you press the right mouse button when the mouse pointer
hovers above that widget. You can also connect to the "activate" signal of the
GtkWidget to activate a callback {proc} when the user presses the enter key to
confirm his textual input.

For more information see

+ https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkEntry.html

One special property of the GtkEntry widget is the fact that it implements the GtkEditable
interface, see

+ https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkEditable.html

So all the functions of GtkEditable can be used on GtkEntry widgets tas well. We use in our example above
the function setWidthChars() in the form [.code]#entry.widthChars = 32# to give it the right size to
show up to 32 characters -- you can type in longer text, it scrolls.

Don't forget that all these widgets are children of the parent GtkWidget class, so
you can use all the GtkWidget functions also. We use grabFocus() in the buttonCB() {proc} to let
keyboard input go continuously to this widget, so that the user has not to click with the mouse pointer
into the entry widget before it accepts keyboard input again.

+ https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkWidget.html


=== GtkGrid

+ https://developer.gnome.org/gtk4/stable/GtkGrid.html

